College of the Canyons T.R.E.E.S. (Tri Release Electromagnetic and Environmental Systems) payload consisted of three capsules, two containing environmental sensor suites and one containing a magnetic field sensor that would be deployed from the NASA Wallops sounding rocket at apogee (160 km above the earth’s surface) to gather data on Sulfur dioxide (SO2) concentrations in the thermosphere all the way down to the troposphere and to gather information about Earth’s magnetic field.


The project was a collaboration between the school’s Astronomy and Physics club (APC) and Environmental Science club, with atmospheric SO2 concentrations selected as the focus due to its role in biodiversity loss and climate change. Sulfur dioxide presence in the atmosphere has been known to cool the surface environment beneath it (for example, when volcanoes erupt, they release sulfuric acid into the atmosphere which combines with oxygen to form sulfur dioxide and other aerosols which reflect solar radiation and decrease temperatures).


Some scientists argue that injecting sulfur dioxide into the stratosphere will mitigate climate change. However, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) also points out that the presence of sulfur dioxide in the atmosphere leads to acid rain (since sulfur dioxide is volatile and combines with water to form sulfuric acid that falls to the surface of the earth with precipitation) leaching nutrients from the Earth and contaminating environmental habitats. Acid rain reduces the pH of the environment (lake water has been decreasing in pH for 50+ years) and this is a particular issue for marine environments that are facing a rapid drop in pH due to an oversaturation of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere (ocean acidification).


Since most SO2 measurements are taken from the troposphere and stratosphere, T.R.E.E.S. was designed to take measurements beginning from the thermosphere with particular interest given to the mesosphere, an atmospheric layer which is too high to reach with scientific balloons and too low for satellites to access. By retrieving this data, T.R.E.E.S. could provide environmental and atmospheric scientists with more information to assess and combat climate change through mesosphere-inclusive climate models.